Hey, welcome back in this lesson.
I want to do something kind of fun.
I think it's going to be fun.
And that is I want to merge the large data set that we had been working with when in the streams of
lambdas API.
I want to revisit that data set and see if we can get that data loaded into our real database now.
OK.
I think this is going to be kind of fun.
So we're going to need to do a little bit of setup, though, to make this work the way that I have
envisioned it.
So let's jump right over to the code and see what we can do here.
So the first thing I'm going to do is to open up the spreadsheet with a sample of our large data set.
OK, so here we are with a sample of our data set.
And the first thing I wanted to do and here is to identify if there are other fields that we should
go ahead and model in our people class before we attempt to try to load this data.
And when I say load the data, let me let me explain here.
I'm not planning for us to load up all of this data in terms of all the columns.
There are a lot of columns here that I don't care about at all.
I just want to get a small subset of the most typical ones, OK, because I don't want to sit here modeling
out this entire table in Java.
OK.
But I think a few additional good candidates might be the email field and possibly their address too.
Although I'm thinking I want to hold off on that because I think I've got a special way that I want
us to go about doing the addresses.
So mostly I'm thinking, let's just add in the email field for now, and we'll go with that.
OK.
So let's jump over to the idea.
All right.
And then let's jump into the person class.
And I think all we really need to do here probably is just add an email field, so that's going to be
a string and we can just call it email.
It was easy.
Now we'll need to generate getters and setters.
And there we go.
And we're also going to need to consider now what do we want to do about the constructors?
When we were working on the credit repository, we kept creating these longer and longer versions of
the constructor.
And I did state at that time that there might be a day of reckoning where we had one to perhaps reconcile
these things down to one or something like that.
And I'm thinking the answer is maybe no, the day has not come yet.
So let me tell you one thing here.
It's one thing to have a few constructors for that class's most common properties to be set, especially
as I've mentioned a few times before.
If those properties are properties that need to exist in order for the object to even make sense.
Right.
So if you're creating a person and you don't have a first name or last name, maybe that's not really
a person.
But there will come a point where the properties really are kind of optional, right?
Like the salary that could be considered optional.
Now, in this case, I added the salary here as a convenience so that we could create a person and set
all of the pertinent information that we were caring about at that time, all in one go, rather than
having to do it in separate lines of code.
But truly, the salary is probably kind of an optional property.
It's not as intrinsic to who a person is as their first name, last name and date of birth, right?
So with that being said, I'm not inclined to add any more fields onto an existing constructor or make
a fourth constructor, which is starting to get a little excessive for my taste for for what we're doing
here.
So we'll set that email in a different way, but we've got the email filled there now, so let's jump
into our test class then.
All right, because this is where I think we're going to make the magic happen.
And so what I want to do here is just to use this test class, not necessarily to write an actual test
in this particular case, but actually just as a place for us to write some code to open up our large
dataset file and load it all into the database.
OK?
This is just a very convenient place for us to be able to do that kind of a thing.
It's already got a connection.
In fact, it owns the connection, right?
And so we can make use of it very effectively right here.
All right.
So let's create a new test method.
And maybe we can just call it know load data.
All right, and so what I have envisioned here is we're going to make use of the Streams API to do what
we've done before, which is to open up that data file and start streaming through it and create people
out of it.
But after we create a person, then we're going to turn around and just say it into the database, OK?
Using our existing code, that's what I've got in mind.
All right.
So if you feel comfortable to do so, why don't you try getting as far as you can with this before I
do?
And then you can meet back up with me and see how I do it.
All right.
So I'm going to go ahead and do this now.
So let's see.
Here we do a files the lines path of and then I need a path and I also need to import the path class.
All right.
So I need that file so you can go back to one of the old projects.
If the data file is still in your computer in the same place, I'm going to go look it up real quick.
Be right back.
OK, so I've got that path and I'm going to paste it in on from my computer.
And just remember now my path won't be your path, almost for sure.
Unless you happen to be on a Mac and your name is Terry and you kept all your files in the exact same
places that I did, which is improbable.
OK.
And then I've got this red squiggly here because the lines method does throw an exception.
Since I'm in a test, though, I'm not even going to bother to wrap this line in a try, catch or try
with resources or any of that.
I'm just going to let the exception be added to the method of this test, right?
Because since it's a test, if there's any trouble here, I'll just let the test fail, right?
OK.
So there's that.
And now we can start doing our streams stuff.
So we will now have a stream of strings, right?
One string per line in the text file.
The first line will be our header row, right?
And so we want to skip over that one so we can use the skip method here to skip over that.
And so the next thing we'll want to do is to convert one comma separated string into an array using
those commas, right?
And so we can do that with a map because we're doing a conversion right and then we're going to take
those lines.
So I'm going to make a lambda expression of L and call the string method L Dot split.
And I want it to split on the common.
And I hope that's all making sense to you.
I think we spend quite a bit of time in this world, so I'm not going to explain this any deeper.
If this is not ringing any bells for you, though, you can jump back to the streams and lambdas videos
and rewatch some of those to see my deeper explanation for what's going on here.
So out of this call will be now getting a stream of string arrays.
And so then we'll need to convert those string arrays into person objects, right?
And so here I'm going to use a lambda expression of a variable of a four array, and now I can actually
start creating this person, right?
So we'll do a new person and I can make use of one of the constructors that we already have.
But this is only going to get get us so far right now.
I actually don't want to use either of these first two constructors, though, because these two constructors
are taking an input of a long.
And I don't want to specify an ID here because these are going to go into the database, the database
is going to generate these IDs for us.
So I think for that reason, I'm going to call this third one here.
OK.
So let's take a quick look at the spreadsheet and remember now what the indexes are for the first name
and last name.
So if you imagine each of these columns was separated by commas before and each one, each one is now
an element in our array.
The first column would be Element Index zero.
Then one, then two.
So first name will be two, and then the last name will be four.
Right?
OK, so so we need to specify a first name.
So that'll be index two.
And then the last name is Index four, and then the next thing is a zoned date time for the date of
birth.
Now, if we go back and look at the spreadsheet, we will recall that the date of birth and the time
of birth are in two separate fields.
But in our code, we've modeled the date of birth as a zoned date time.
So it's a combination of these two things, plus actually one more thing that is in here, which is
the time zone, right?
So that's going to be a little extra code that we're going to have to write to combine these two fields
together.
And because of that, I'm actually thinking, let's go ahead and turn this into a code block instead
of trying to do it all on one line.
OK.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to select all of this and then I'm just going to press the opening
curly brace there.
And intelligence already understands that I'm creating a code block until it made a new line and put
my new person code on its own line and all of that.
All right.
So now I have a little room to breathe and write a little bit more code in this block, right?
So first thing I think I want to do is to create a local date using this date of birth.
Just the date of birth.
I'll handle the time of birth and in just a moment, but we'll focus on the date of birth first.
So I'm going to make a local date and this is indexed.
10, right?
Zero one two three four five six seven, eight, nine and 10, right.
So 10 and 11.
OK.
So let's make a local date.
However, we're going to need to pass that date string, right?
And so there is the pass method here, and we're going to need the second one here date time format
that takes a date, time, format or right?
So I'm going to select that second one there.
So we first will pass in the string, which is coming from the 10th index into the array.
And then the second parameter will be a date time formatter, so we can reference DTF of pattern the
of pattern method and then we can specify a pattern.
So.
So jumping back over to the spreadsheet here, the pattern is going to be month, day and then year.
Right now, you may recall that the month has to be specified as a capital m for month because lowercase
means minutes because this date time format or can do patterns of both dates and time, right?
So a month forward slash and then day forward slash and then year was four digits one two three four.
Right.
Also recall that we're using a single character for the month.
If I did two of these, that would mean that the month should be with leading zeros.
OK, so if it were the month of seven, it would be zero seven.
But that's not how they're specified over here.
There's no leading zeros, right?
So we'll do one m and one D.
All right.
And so then that should give us the local date, and I'm going to go ahead and capture that.
And I will call that date of birth or DOB.
And then let's do the time so we can use the local time class.
And it also has a pass that looks pretty much the same and so will pass in a 11:00 here and then another
date time for matter of pattern.
And now we'll specify the time pattern.
And so let's go look at what that pattern is and.
This is looking pretty straightforward, I think hour, minute, second and then a.m. or p.m..
All right.
So we can just create a date time format or use another of pattern, and now the pattern is going to
be ours.
Minutes calling seconds space and then the AM and PM and the code for that is just an A.
And if you didn't remember that, you could always hover over this of pattern method to pull up the
Java Dock, or you could click right in to it to get there as well and take a look at the the Java dock
here.
And you could then go into this pattern of letters and symbols right there.
And now you can get to all the patterns and symbols.
All right.
So that's how you can remember it.
So you don't need to memorize all of these things, is what I'm saying, right?
All right.
And so let's close that off and then capture that and that'll be time of birth.
And then I suppose we could just make a local date time.
Of a local date and a local time, right?
The overcomer t0 be like, so then I'll capture that and I guess I'll call it date, time of birth.
All right.
And so now when we create our new person and I suppose while I'm at it might as well go ahead and create
a zoned date time as well, because that's what actually goes into creating a new person, right?
So we'll create a zone date time of a dto b, and then this can also take a zone ID.
Now, since we don't actually know where in the world these people were born, I'm just going to set
all of these to GMT zero.
OK, so zone date or zone I.D. of.
Plus zero.
And I will capture that, and I'll just call this zee A-to-B for lack of a better name.
Zoned date, time of birth.
All right.
So finally, for this last field here, I guess I don't need that anymore.
And so now I can just pass in this.
Toby.
And then I will capture that.
And just call it arson.
All right.
So now, though, we're not done right now, we've just got a basic person created.
So now let's go ahead and set a few other things on this person, right?
So person dot, so they've got a salary so we can set that salary.
So let's go back into the data, into the spreadsheet here and find what column their salary is now.
I don't feel like counting quite that far.
I don't even know where that is.
There it is, yeah, I don't know.
Well, Z, so I guess that would be 26.
All right.
So let's let's try that.
So now this is going to be a string coming out of the array, right?
So it would be a 26.
But we need to specify the decimal here.
So we'll create a new big decimal.
Now, if you'll recall, big decimal works just fine with the string being passed directly in to it,
so we don't need to do any fancy formatting or anything like that.
All right.
So there's the salary and then we just created a an email field as well.
And let's go see what that index would be.
So the email is, let's see zero one two three four five six.
A.
Six.
All right.
So I think we're done creating this person, so now we can just return this person, and so now we will
have a stream of people coming out of this map here.
And so now all we need to do is save them.
And so to save, we can just use a for each and then we can call our repo.
Save method like so.
And of course, I'm using a method reference here because that's all we need to use here, which, you
know, is equivalent to doing something like p arrow repo to save pee.
Right?
That's equivalent to that.
But we can save ourselves a few keystrokes, right, by just using the method reference.
OK, so a couple other things we're going to need to do now because we've added the email row and we're
also grabbing the salary.
We're going to need to map those two additional properties to fields in the database, right?
So let's jump over to the actual people repository class and find our save map for save method here.
And here's where we are actually grabbing the first name, last name and the date of birth and setting
them for the prepared statement.
OK.
So actually, first thing we'll need to do is take a look at our school for saving or inserting into
the database, right?
So it's right here.
Safe person sequel.
So insert into people first name, last name, date of birth, these three fields.
So now we're going to want to extend that a bit.
Right.
And I'm actually inclined perhaps to change this string format now into a text block so that I can properly
format all of this rather than trying to squeeze it all on one line.
So I'm just going to put a couple more quotes here and then make a new line like so insert into people
and then maybe I'll put on a new line here first.
First name, last name, date of birth, comma, salary, comma, email.
And now I know we have a salary field in the database.
Feel like I'm saying Sally Field like the actress, if any of you know who that is, anyway, salary
filled.
Now I'm going to be thinking salary field for the Sally field every time I say that salary filled.
Now we do have a salary field, but we don't have an email field, so we're going to need to add that
email field to that database table also, OK.
So let's not forget to do that.
All right.
But anyway, here are our fields and then the values.
Let me click that and I'm going to put that on its own line as well.
And so now we're going to have a couple extra.
Couple of extra parameters to bind to.
All right.
So that's what we need for that.
And so down here now for the map, for save, we need to actually grab those two extra properties and
set them.
So for the salary, that's going to be a big decimal.
So we're going to set big decimal.
And that'll be the fourth parameter.
And then we're simply going to call entity get salary like so and then we're also going to set the email
field, which we haven't created in the database yet.
But this will just be a string and it'll be the fifth parameter.
Entity, don't get email.
Like so.
All right.
So now let's pop over to the database and add this email field.
So we'll go to the aliases here and I'm going to click on people test.
To open back up the H2 database for the people test.
All right.
And so we want to add an email column now.
So to do that, we'll need to alter the table.
And I think we might have done a little bit of altering before, but here we go.
So we'll do an altar table.
People add column and we're going to name it email and it's going to be a VAR car.
Two, five five.
And I think that's sufficient right there.
So then I'm going to do a controlled return to add that field.
And now I can do something like a select everything from people and just see what's in there.
OK.
Very good, so there's our email column now right here, and we've got a salary there and date of birth
and everything else, so I think we're pretty good there.
All right.
So let me remember to get out of here now.
I'm just going to close that.
Yes, and no, I don't want to retain anything.
OK.
All right.
So now back over here in our program, so now I think we're ready now.
I haven't forgotten about the fact that even though we've added these two new columns or fields for
saving, we haven't actually done anything for the update or loading and all of that, right?
So we'll we'll we'll get to those as well.
But for right now, I just wanted to focus on the save.
All right.
So now let's jump back over to our test class.
OK, so now that we've done this, I think we can go ahead and test this out and to test it.
Let's just put a limit on the number of records that we actually process.
OK.
So we'll put a limit of, I don't know, let's do like 100 100 records to start off with.
All right.
So let's go ahead and run this and just see what happens.
OK, so got some kind of a failure here.
Eight, 14, three a.m. could not be passed, let's see, did I use the wrong?
Oh, I'm sorry.
Somehow, I somehow I completely forgot to actually type in the the the parsing string there, didn't
I?
All right.
So the string here would be hours, minutes, seconds and then a four a.m. and p.m. I could have sworn
I did that, but somehow I lost it.
OK, so there we go.
Sorry about that.
You were probably watching and realizing I never showed you what to fill in there.
All right.
So let's try this again.
Run it.
All right.
So it still didn't work.
Let's see.
The character percent is neither a decimal digit, no decimal point nor e notation.
Exponential mark.
OK, so there's a percent sign in our data set, apparently.
Let's go take a look over here and see if we can find where that might be coming from.
Ah, OK, I know what the problem is, we we used Index 26, but everything starts with zero, so I
guess it really should be Index 25, which would be the 26th column.
My bad.
All right.
So we want 25 index 25.
Rookie mistake.
I should have known better, right?
So we'll do a 25 there.
All right.
Let's run this.
Oh, there we go.
OK, so now we see our results here.
Now this is just for 100 and also remember now hope that we run from within these tests does not remain
in the database because we've set the database to stop auto committing data.
OK, so once the test is done running, anything that we've done to the database gets wiped away automatically.
It never it never gets made permanent.
Right?
But here are our 100 saves to the database before they all got wiped out.
And one thing I can tell you now that we're not going to want if we're going to load five million of
these into the database, we're not going to win all of this output here.
All this text output, because believe it or not, even just printing these records to the screen when
you're doing five million records will slow down the process considerably.
So you don't want this at all.
This is just too much.
OK, so let's jump into the Creed repository class and turn that off.
And that's going to be on the save, right?
So if we look through here in the save method, there's one place where we're printing some stuff out,
so I'm just going to comment that out.
And then here's another one where we're printing some stuff out and I'm going to get rid of that, too.
So let's jump back over to the test and let's just run it one more time and make sure that we cleared
out all the printouts.
Yep.
Nice blank screen now.
OK, so that's good, that's believe me, that's going to help a lot.
You definitely want to make sure you do that.
All right now, the next thing we're going to want to do and this may not be obvious to you is we're
going to also want to modify how much ram or how much memory we are allocating to this test when we
run it.
So since we are loading up five million records and we're using the H2 database as an embedded library
within our running code here, that means that quite a bit of memory is going to be needed to efficiently
and quickly run through all five million of those records.
So we're going to want to increase our memory.
So the way to do that is will go up here to the run menu and then we can go down to edit configurations.
And since we just ran that test, it's probably already going to be highlighted right here, people
repository test that load data.
If it isn't, go ahead and click on it.
OK, I'm going to make a little room here.
All right.
So what we can do is come over here to modify options and click on this dropdown and we want to go down
here to Java, add VM options.
So this means add virtual machine options.
These are going to be options for for manipulating how our Java virtual machine will work for this process
that we are about to run someone to click on that.
And now that opens up this extra little field down here VM options, and we can specify some standard
options for how the Java virtual machine should run.
So let me explain what we're about to do here by default, when we run Java programs, if we don't specify
how much memory we want our programs to utilize, then a default amount will be allocated.
Now that amount can change from version to version.
And because of that, we don't really want to leave it up to chance so we can actually specify two parameters.
We can specify a minimum amount of RAM and then a maximum amount.
So what I would recommend here, if you've got enough RAM on your computer, I would recommend specifying
a minimum of two gigs of RAM because we're loading up five million records.
And if you've got more ram on your computer that you don't mind temporarily allocating to this process,
I'd strongly consider going even higher than that.
So in fact, in my case, I'm actually going to go for four gigs of RAM.
So you'll have to decide for yourself how much RAM is appropriate for you.
If you if you're running on a computer that only has four gigs of RAM and you've got a lot of programs
open, you may only be able to safely get away with one gig allocated, maybe two.
I don't know if you should go much more than that.
So the way to do this, though, is to type in hyphen capital X, M, S, lowercase M and lowercase
S and then a number.
So since I want four gigs, I'm going to do four thousand ninety six m.
The M is megs, but it's four thousand megs, which means four gigs.
OK, so Xmas lets you specify the starting amount of memory.
OK, so I'm saying start up with four gigs of RAM allocated to this process, and then I'm going to
also specify the Max with another hyphen capital x m x OK and then another four thousand ninety six.
So what I'm telling the system in effect is just start off with with four gigs.
And that's how much you're going to have the whole time, right?
If I didn't say that, I could live off the starting amount, in which case Java would start with whatever
its default is for whatever version of Java you're running, which could be as low as maybe 256 megs,
and then it would gradually ramp up to using the full four thousand ninety six.
I don't even want to waste time with that ramp up because I want this process to get done quickly,
and so I'm just going to give it the whole entire amount all at once.
But I feel pretty comfortable that this would be fairly sufficient for what I want to do.
Now, if you don't want to do four thousand ninety six, you could try two thousand forty eight, which
is half of that, or 1024, which is half of that.
Anything lower than that.
And I don't know how long that's going to take.
So it will probably work.
It will just take a while.
OK, so that's all we need to do there.
And then I'm going to click, OK, sorry, you can't see my OK button here, but trust me, I'm definitely
clicking it.
OK, and then the last thing we need to do is we want this data to actually stay in the database now.
So we don't want it to get like erased when this test is done.
And so in order to make sure that this data that we're going to load into the database actually stays
there even after the test is done, we will need to commit it ourselves.
And the way we can do that is to access our connection.
And then there is a commit method, and so we can just call that method.
Now that method can throw an exception.
So we will want to pass that exception off to the signature of this test.
Someone to just do an option return and add exception to Method Signature.
And again, only doing that because it's a test.
We probably don't want to do that outside of a test method and we were doing 100, but now I'm going
to go ahead and let it load up the whole entire data set.
So I'm going to delete that limit 100 and now we are ready to run this.
So I'm just going to come up here and click Run.
All right.
And it says it's done.
So now let's verify that it's done and jump back over into squirrel and see how many records there are.
So back into the aliases people test connect, by the way, I'm double clicking on that.
People test alias to open that up.
That's that's how I'm doing that if it wasn't obvious.
OK, so I'm going to do a select count star from people.
Look at that five million and 11 records.
And now let's just take a look at the first 100 records.
You know, at this point, you want to be really careful not to do something like select star from people
because that would retrieve all five million records and you all want to do that.
And it's a lot of records.
All right.
But we can retrieve like the first one, which, by the way, this will show you the H2 sequel equivalent
of doing a stream API where we used the limit word right keyword.
So select everything from people fetch first 100 rows only.
OK, so this is how you can limit the number of rows coming back with H2.
OK?
And every database may do it a little differently.
They may have their own special keywords like I think either Oracle or SQL Server may have like a limit
keyword, which is the same keyword that we're using an exchange API.
So.
So be careful there.
This this probably won't work exactly like this on other database engines besides H2.
All right.
So anyway, let's go ahead and run that.
Hey, looks like we got some data here.
So notice our original 11 records.
Here are have these very low ID numbers.
But then the new records that we've loaded up have much bigger ID numbers and recall like this ID column
here is auto generated for us, right when we insert data.
And I recognize some of these names, Lizbeth, and there's a date of birth and some salary data there
and some email.
So hey, looks like all of that worked really well for us.
So we have finally loaded up a significant amount of data into a real database.
So in the upcoming lessons, we're going to play around with this data a little bit.
We'll look at doing in the database some of the similar types of use cases that we did with the Stream's
API back in that module.
So I think we've got some cool things to look forward to doing here.
So I'll see you in the next one.